# Scanner Design

## Lexer

The lexer works by reading the input and converting each "word" into a token, replacing keywords and symbols with specific tokens and general names with identifiers. Occasionally, this requires we "peek" ahead to the next character, eg. in the case of attempting to distinguish between `+` and `++`. For some tokens, we may even need to peek ahead multiple characters (eg. to ensure we specifically catch and disallow `>>>=`).

As an implementation detail, the lexer maintains context about its traversal through the input file rather than simply reading through a tokenized input stream. This allows us to output context-sensitive error messages including the exact position of invalid tokens in the input stream.

Several aspects of the Joos specification are checked in the lexer, including

* invalid characters (eg. `#` is invalid in Joos programs anywhere expect as a string/character literal)
* invalid escape characters
* invalid octal values

The lexer is also responsible for stripping comments from the input stream before parsing occurs.

## Grammar

The grammar is based on the Java language specification, including modifications for the JOOS language.  Some of the differences between the JOOS and Java grammars include:

* Joos allows only a single statement in a for condition, ie. it does not allow `for(statement, statement; ...)`
* Joos does not allow multidimensional arrays, ie. `[][]`
* Only Java allows private inheritance
* Joos does not allow `long` values
* Java allows static initializers, but Joos does not
* Joos does not allow unary plus operators
* Joos declarations require explicit inheritance modifiers

The grammar was written as a series of rules in the form:

    X:
        ABC
        XYZ

which means that as a rule, `X` may be replaced with `ABC` or `XYZ`. There is also a case where `X` may simply disappear, we refer to that transition as an epsilon transition and denote it as `\epsilon`

We performed the extra step of converting the Human-readable grammar file into a DFS by creating a Python utility to perform this task for us. This program acts both as a conversion utility and a quick sanity check for ensuring that the grammar we have written follows our own conventions. It scans through the grammar file, and outputs a .cfg file, to then be converted to a .lr1 file via the provided parse table generator (`Jlalr1.java`, or more specifically `Jlr1.class`).

## Parser

The parser is implemented as a simply DFA using the above grammar to define its transition sets. This DFA, then, is fairly straightforward: each token it is fed is simply compared against the list of valid transitions from the current state and the matching transition is returned.

The parser uses the DFA to generate our parse tree. As an optimization, to prevent having to run through the DFA on the entire symbol stack each time a new symbol is parsed, the parser works by maintaining two stacks kept in sync. One stack for the parse tree being created, and another for the DFA states that it should follow.

Each time a token is read, the DFA is consulted to determine which rule the parser should take. If a shift rule is found, the token is put onto the symbol stack as a tree node with no children. If a reduce rule is found, both stacks are popped a number of times equal to the number of tokens in the right-hand-side of the rule. Then, the left-hand-side of the rule, which is guaranteed to be a single token, is used as the new input to the DFA. This repeats recursively.

The symbol stack maintains tree nodes, where each reduce rule creates a new node where its children are the right-hand-side of the rule. Eventually, after the start state is on the top of the stack, the entire parse tree is found as children to the single start state node.

The parser is responsible for the vast majority of the Joos language specification enforcement, ie. anything which is encoded in our grammar.

## Weeder

The parse tree created in the previous step is fed directly into our weeder. The weeder is used to enforce various Joos rules that could not be enforced in our grammar or would render the grammar much more complicated. Specifically, the weeder discovers and prevents:

* integers with leading zeros (these would be octal values, which the Joos specification does not allow)
* out-of-bound (non-32bit) integers
* files containing multiple classes
* concrete methods with no bodies
* abstract methods with bodies
* native methods with bodies
* methods marked both final and abstract
* methods marked both static and abstract
* methods marked both static and final
* native methods which are not static
* final fields without initializers
* classes and interfaces with bad names (their name does not match the filename)

As you can see, many of these rules are applied simply to prevent the grammar around method declarations and bodies from becoming overly complicated and specific.

## AST Generation

Finally, we used AST generation as a second weeding phase. This allowed us to easily cover a few more cases.

### Invalid left-hand values in cast expressions

In order to ensure that every possible left-hand value in cast expressions was acceptable, our grammar allows the superset of acceptable values specified by the following grammatic rule:

    CastExpression:
        ( Expression ) UnaryNoSignExpression

Clearly, though, `Expression` is not a valid value here.

Once we have simplified the parse tree to an AST, this rule becomes utter simplicity to enforce though: `CastExpression`s with an `Expression` as the left-hand value must only be a `Name` of some sort (some amount of alternating `IDENTIFIER`s and `.`s) rather than any real `Expression` value. The only additional case which must be caught here is preventing double-parentheses (ie. `((Object))null`) as per `Je_1_Cast_DoubleParenthese.java`.

### Out-of-bound Integers

Since it it much simpler to recognize a unary negation (ie. `-42`) after simplifying to an AST (since the lookup can be performed directly rather than recursively), we perform the out-of-bound check against `- (2 ** 31 - 1)` after performing this conversion.
