# Code Generation Design

The code generation portion of this compiler takes the environments generated in the previous step (ie. the semantic analysis performed on the Abstract Syntax Trees) and transforms them into NASM code. We present the conventions used in the generated assembly as well as and overview of this phase and how it was tested herein.

## Design Decisions

In generating assembly code, we use consistent conventions for:

- parameter passing
- local variable storage
- object layout, and
- naming of labels for method implementations and data

Those conventions are described below.

### Parameter Passing

When calling a method, we always obey the following process:

1. push the current "this"
1. push the "this" argument of the called method
1. push each parameter in reverse order
1. create a stack frame
1. call the method
1. restore the old stack frame
1. pop off each of the parameters
1. pop off the "this" argument
1. restore the current "this"

Each method, upon being called, can simply retrieve each of its arguments (again in reverse order) from the stack, as well as its "this" argument.

The stack, then, will appear as follows to the called method:

```
--------------
|     ESP    |
--------------
|   param n  |
--------------
|  param n-1 |
--------------
     ...
--------------
|   param 0  |
--------------
| this param |
--------------
|    this    |
--------------
```

The called method is responsible for copying the params from the stack, but does not move the stack pointer. This allows the calling function to clean up the stack in a consistent manner (ie. it simply pops everything that it pushed in reverse order).

When returning values, we set the value of the returned variable in `eax`. Its address is returned in `esi`. By consistently setting these two registers for each operation, we can write straightforward code generation code for any expression type.

### Local Variable Storage
Local variables are stored in the `.bss` section of as pointers to allocated memory. They are stored using a consistent naming scheme which ensures there are no collisions.

For example, consider the `int ret = 0;` declaration in the `parseInt(String s)` method of the standard library's `Integer` class; this is given the label `__java.lang.Integer.parseInt_java.lang.String_.ret`. This label, then, is used for all references to this variable within this method.

Since the analysis step of the compiler has ensured we do not create multiple variables in the same scope with the same name, we can be assured that this label will not have any naming collision.

The entire process for storing a sample value at this address is as follows:

```
mov eax, 4
call __malloc
mov [__java.lang.Integer.parseInt_java.lang.String_.ret], eax

mov dword eax, 0xDEADBEEF
mov edi, [__java.lang.Integer.parseInt_java.lang.String_.ret]
mov [edi], eax
```

We can consistently access the value of this variable with

```
mov esi, [__java.lang.Integer.parseInt_java.lang.String_.ret]
mov eax, [esi]
```

### Object Layout
Each object is layed out with 4 bytes for a unique key followed by four bytes for each field in that object, including static, non-static, and inherited fields. In the case of arrays, we store the length of the array in the first four bytes and each item in the array in sequence thereafter. For example:

```
0x1000 | 0xDEADBEEF |
0x1004 | 0x2000     |
0x1008 | 0x2010     |
...
0x2000 | 3          |
0x2004 | 'f'        |
0x2008 | 'o'        |
0x200C | 'o'        |
0x2010 | 42         |
```

The above sample memory defines a class with two fields: an array of chars and an integer. The array is of length 3 with members 'f', 'o', and 'o', and the integer has value 42. The instance is identified by unique key `0xDEADBEEF`, which is used for comparisons.

### Naming of Labels for Method Implementations and Data

Each method label is built in chunks:

1. the fully qualified class name (eg. `java.lang.Integer`)
1. the name of the method (eg. `equals`)
1. the fully qualified type of each parameter, in order (eg. `java.lang.Object`)

The label is then built by joining these chunks (eg. label `_java.lang.Integer.equals_java.lang.Object_:`). Since we have ensured in a previous step that each method in a class must have a unique combination of name and parameter types, these labels must necessarily be unique.

For labels used for other purposes, eg. looping or storing constants, labels consist of a simple tag followed by a uniquely identifying ID. For example, we may have loop label `.loop_1234:` or constant label `string_812:`. Note that labels which exist for the purpose of `jmp`ing within a method are prepended with a `.`, since this makes them method-local.

## Structure Overview

Given an `Environment` created for each file passed into our compiler wherein the Environment has resolved all relevant lookups etc, the code generation step is straightforward: for each Environment, generate a source file of the same name. To generate these source files, we iterate through each field to generate initialization methods. We then iterate through the constructors, implicitly calling these field initialization methods in addition to the pre-existing constructor bodies (and their implicit `super()` calls). Then, we iterate through each method in the objects' body (as well as all inherited methods), and generate code blocks for those.

Finally, we create a `_start` method which calls the `static int test()` method.

To generate the bodies of these methods, we parse the body's AST recursively; at each level of descent, the current statement type is handled specially. For example, for a variable assignment, we process that node by:

1. recursively processing its left-hand side
1. storing the address returned by the resursion
1. recursively processing its right-hand side
1. retrieving the stored address of the left-hand side
1. storing the value returned by the right-hand side recusion in this address

Since, as we mentioned above, each resursion returns a value in `eax` and an address in `esi`, this is straightforward.

## Testing

This phase of the compiler was tested identically to the previous phases: every public test case defined for assignment 5 was copied into the test environment and run through continuous integration testing. This was the bulk of the testing since failures here provided a clear direction for future development. This was mostly performed automatically: the list of test cases which currently are failing on the `master` branch of the project was easily visible and thus useable to determine where future development efforts should be directed.

Additional testing was performed mostly on an as-needed basis: any cases determined to be relevant to compiler correctness but not included in the public tests were created as unique tests and included in the continuous integration. At this point, the continuous integration has thus become an amalgum of: public assignment test cases, bare JOOS grammatical features, "special" unique tests for better feature evaluation, and stdlib tests to ensure that the current stdlib was always compiled correctly.

For development of features, individual (failing) test cases were run repeatedly until a changeset was created which would cause them to pass. At this time, the entire test set was run: if the test set (which validated against public test cases and "special" tests up to and including the current assignment) had fewer failures than the `master` branch, that feature was applied to `master` and submitted to Marmoset (to ensure that the most correct compiler was always submitted and marked).
